# Gl100

A class to control and interface with the PTI tunable dye laser.


## Attributes

### LOWER_LIMIT (float)

Lowest limit laser can be set to in nm (380.00)

### UPPER_LIMIT (float)

Highest limit laser can be set to in nm (750.00)

### ZERO (string)

Command used to zero the stepper motor (X0= 15T)

### GET_MANUFACTURER (string)

Command used to get the manufacturer information (X-12?)

### GET_POSTION (string)

Used to get the current stepper motor position (X-1?)

### __toml_config__ (dict)

Default configuration template for the device

### data (dict)

Measurement data storage

### config

Bound configuration as defined by the user

### connect_to_rex (bool)

Whether to connect to rex experiment manager

### sock

Socket connection when rex is enabled

### step_size (float)

Step size for wavelength measurements.

### start_wavelength (float)

Initial start wavelength for a scan

### final_wavelength (float)

End wavelength for a measurement scan

### grating_factor (float)

Factor related to the diffraction grating used in the system.

### name (string)

Name or identifier for the device.

### scan_data (dict)

Stores data related to the scan, namely positions and motor steps required, as well as error from desired wavelenght goals.

### start_measurement_position (float)

Position of the start wavelength in stepper motor units.

### end_measurement_position (float)

Position of the end wavelength in stepper motor units.

### min_step_size (float)

Minimum allowable step size for the measurement system. (min 1/grating factor nm)

### current_index (int)

The current index position within a scan or measurement sequence.

### total_steps_from_zero (int)

Total number of steps the stepper motor has moved from the zero position.

### total_steps (int)

Total number of steps required to complete the scan from start to end.


## Configuration

This class requires configuration in your `config.toml` file:


### Example Configuration

```toml

[device.GL100_Dye_Laser]
# GL100_Dye_Laser measurement configuration
# Step size in nm
step_size = 0.1
# Calibrated wavelength from mechanical dial (nm)
initial_position = 490
# Start wavelength in (nm)
start_position = 500
# End wavelength in (nm)
end_position = 600
# Dye used for the experiment
dye = "C540"
```


## Methods

### setup_config

Sets up the device configuration by loading necessary parameters from the config file and checks any hardware limits.
Connects to the correct port if the device is found.



### check_limits

Checks if the configured positions are within the device's wavelength limits.
Raises:
    DeviceError: If any position is outside the defined LOWER_LIMIT or UPPER_LIMIT.



### check_step

**Signature:** `check_step(step_size)`

Ensures the step size is not smaller than the minimum allowed step size.
Logs a warning if the step size is adjusted.

Args:
    step_size (float): Desired step size.



### move_to_next_position

Moves to the next scan position and returns the corresponding scan data.

Returns:
    dict or None: Next position data or None if scan is complete.



### move

**Signature:** `move(steps)`

Moves the stepper motor by the specified number of steps.

Args:
    steps (int): Number of steps to move.



### measure

Performs a measurement at the current scan position.

Returns:
    dict or None: Measurement data at the current position, or None if the scan is complete.



### find_correct_port

**Signature:** `find_correct_port(expected_response, baudrate, timeout)`



### connect



### send_command

**Signature:** `send_command(command)`



### return_to_zero

Return to the zero position by moving exact negative of total steps.
Includes backlash compensation.



### move_to_start

Move to start position with backlash compensation.
Always approaches from lower wavelength to avoid mechanical backlash.

Returns:
    float: The actual position reached in nm.


